
# Computing window-based isolation-by-distance within- and between- candidate species

This directory provides the scripts to compute isolation-by-distance within and between candidates by correlating individual genetic distances with geographic distances (on log scale). Then, we used the normalized root mean square error (NRMSE) to quantify deviations of observed genetic distances between candidates from those predicted by the within-candidate geographic clines in genetic distance. Accordingly, two NRMSE values were obtained for each genomic window, one for each candidate. The rationale behind the NRMSE is that we can control for within-candidate genetic variation, so that NRMSE distributions are comparable across all candidate pairs, regardless of the associated extent of spatial structure. The input files used in [van Elst et al. 2025](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41559-024-02547-w) can be found in [input](input) and can be used to test the pipeline. For any question and doubts send an email to gabriele.sgarlata[at]gmail[dot]com.

* [Compute log-nrmse between within-species and between-species isolation-by-dostance](createLOGNrmse.R): This script is used to compute ‘isolation-by-distance’ (IBD) for each genomic window by fitting a linear regression between individual pairwise genetic distances and geographic distances (logarithm). For istance, given two candidate sister species, the IBD is computed for each candidate species (within-species IBD), separately, and then by considering only individual pairwise comparisons between candidate species (between-species IBD). The fitted parameters are then used to estimate the normalized root mean squared error (NRMSE) for each genomic window (see [Van Elst et al., 2025](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41559-024-02547-w) for more details).

* [Auxiliary R functions](functions_LOGnrmse.R): This script contains all the relevant R functions needed for computing the within-species and between-species IBD as well as the NRMSE distributions.

